design/notes_v3.md, before:

# Modut

A programming language with...
- functional
- statically typed
- substructurally typed (subtypes)
- conjunctions/disjunctions of types
- tagged types
- [structural refinement types][struct-ref-types-tyde2022]

## Restrictions

No higher-kinded polymorphism
- Higher-kinded polymorphism would require keeping track of polarity constraints
  on higher-kinded type variables

Tuple fields must be named (tagged).
- It's better etiquette anyway
- The flattening and unordering of conjunctions is important to many subtyping
  features, so its cumbersome to add ordered tuples as a basic language feature
  rather than just as a type alias i.e.
  `Tuple3 = forall a b c => { Field1#a , Field2#b , Field3#c }`.

No basic datatypes i.e. `data Nat = ...`
- Tags, conjunctions, disjunctions, and fixpoints allow for the full
  expressiveness (and more) of _regular types_, which has been recognized as a
  reasonable basis for a polymorphic datatype system.
- Named datatypes are just type aliases. Let-normal form keeps track of the
  named given in type aliases to ensure nice-looking error messages.

## Syntax

- The notation `*[...]` indicates that the contained phrase can be repeated any
  number of times (including 0 times).
- The notation `?[...]` indicates that the contained phrase is optional.
```
<kd> ::= *[ Type -> ] Type

// TODO: need to keep track of polarities? for the sake of subtyping? 
// TODO: or, will this work out since let-type just makes an alias which is expanded during typechecking
<ty1> ::= ∀ *[<ty-var>] ⇒ <ty>

<ty> ::=
  | <ty-var>
  | <tag> # <ty>
  | {*[<ty> ,]}
  | {*[<ty> |]}
  | <ty> → <ty>
  | μ <ty-var> ⇒ <ty>
  | <ty-var> <ty>

<tm> ::=
  | <tm-var>
  | <tag>#<tm>
  | <tm>.<tag>
  | {*[ <tm> , ]} 
  | λ (<tm-var> : <ty>) ⇒ b
  | μ <tm-var> ⇒ <tm>
  | <tm> <tm>
  | let <tm-var> : <ty1> = <tm> in <tm>
  | let <ty-var> : <kd> = <ty1> in <tm>

<tag> ::= <tag-name>
<ty-var> ::= <type-variable-name>
<tm-var> ::= <term-var-name>
```

Syntax sugar
```text
<tm> +::= λ{ *[ <pat> ⇒ <tm> | ] }

<pat> ::=
  | <tm-var> : <ty>
  | <tag>#<pat>
  | {*[ <pat> , ]}

λ{ (x : A) ⇒ b }      ::= λ (x : A) ⇒ b
λ{ t#p ⇒ b }          ::= λ (x : t#_) ⇒ λ{ p ⇒ b } x.t
λ{ { [ pᵢ , ] } ⇒ b } ::= λ a ⇒ [ λ{ pᵢ ⇒ ] b [ } a ] 
λ{ [ pᵢ ⇒ bᵢ | ] }    ::= { [ λ{ pᵢ ⇒ bᵢ } , ] }
```

Special features:
- Polymorphism is *implicit*
- No *pattern matching* in basic syntax
  - can be achieved via conjunctions of annotated lambdas
- Tag types and terms are special. They are uniquely identified by their tag.
  - The `<tag>#<tm>` form "wraps", or "tags", a type or term.
  - The `<tm>.<tag>` form "unwraps", or "untags", a tagged term.
    - There is no type-level operation to untag a tagged type.

**Examples**
```text
Option = ∀ a ⇒ { None#{,} | Some#a }
Nat = μ n ⇒ { Zero#{,} | Suc#n }


// without syntax sugar
pred_of_Nat =
  { λ (_ : Zero#{,}) ⇒ None#{,} }
  , λ (n : Suc#Nat) ⇒ Some#(n.Suc) }
// with syntax sugar
pred_of_Nat = λ
  { Zero#{,} ⇒ None#{,}
  , Suc#(n : Nat) ⇒ Some#n }

pred_of_Nat : 
  { Zero#{,} → None#{,} | Suc#Nat → Some#Nat } <:
  { Zero#{,} | Suc#Nat } → { None#{,} | Some#Nat } =
  Nat → Option Nat

// without syntax sugar
pred_of_Suc = λ (n : Suc Nat) ⇒ n.Suc#
// with syntax sugar
pred_of_Suc = λ{ Suc#(n : Nat) ⇒ n }

pred_of_Suc :
  Suc#Nat → Nat <:
  Nat → Nat
```

## Kinding

Kinding type variable.
```
∅
---
Γ , (X : Type) ⊢ X : Type
```

Kinding abstraction.
```
Γ , [ (Xᵢ : Type) ] ⊢ A : Type
---
Γ ⊢ ∀ [ Xᵢ ] ⇒ A : [ Type → ] Type
```

Kinding application.
```
Γ ⊢ F = ∀ [ Xᵢ ] ⇒ A
Γ ⊢ F : [ Type → ] Type
[ Γ ⊢ Aᵢ : Type ]
---
Γ ⊢ F [ Aᵢ ] : Type
```

Kinding conjunction.
```
TODO
```

Kinding type disjunction.
```
TODO
```

Kinding arrow.
```
Γ ⊢ A : Type
Γ ⊢ B : Type
---
Γ ⊢ A -> B : Type
```

Kinding fixpoint.
```
Γ , (X : Type) ⊢ A : Type 
---
Γ ⊢ fix X => A : Type
```

## Subtyping

Read `A <: A'` as "`A` is less general than `A'`. For example, `A` is less
general than `{ A | B }`, and `{ A , B }` is less general than `A`.

Notation
```text
{ A } ::= { A | } or { A , }
{ Aᵢ * } ::= { A_1 * ... * A_n } for some n
```

Subtyping coercion.
_Intuition:_ if `A` is more specific that `A'`, then `a : A` implies that 
`a : A'`.
```
Γ ⊢ a : A
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ a : A'
```

**Tagged type**

Subtype under tag.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ t#A <: t#A'
```

**Arrow**

Subtype under arrow.
_Intuition:_ if `f : A → B` is a subtype of `f' : A' → B'`, then `f` handles
only some of the inputs that `f'` does and `f` yields more outputs that `f'`
does.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
Γ ⊢ B' <: B
---
Γ ⊢ (A → B) <: (A' → B')
```

**Conjunction**

Subtype into singleton conjunction (Same as singleton disjunction).
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ A <: { A }
```

Subtype under conjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ { A , B } <: { A' , B }
```

Subtype weaken conjunction.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { A , B } <: { B }
```

Subtype empty conjunction.
_Intuition_: the empty conjunction `{,}` is like unit, is has one form and so
every other type is more specific than it.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ A <: {,}
```

Subtype over arrows under conjunction.
_Intuition:_ this must handle all input types, but client only needs to handle one
output type.
output.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { [ Aᵢ -> Bᵢ , ] } <: { [ Aᵢ , ] } -> { [ Bᵢ | ] }
```

**Disjunction**

Subtype into singleton disjunction. (Same as singleton conjunction.)
```
∅
---
Zero = Zero#{,}
Γ ⊢ A <: { A }
```

Subtype under disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ { A | B } <: { A' | B }
```

Subtype weaken disjunction.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { A } <: { A | B }
```

Subtype empty conjunction.
_Intuition:_ the empty conjunction `{|}` is like void; it has no forms and so it
is more specific than any other type. 
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ {|} <: A
```

Subtype over arrows under disjunction.  
_Intuition:_ this only needs to handle one input type, but client must handle all
types of output.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { [ Aᵢ -> Bᵢ | ] } <: { [ Aᵢ | ] } -> { [ Bᵢ , ] }
```

**Fixpoint**

Subtype under fixpoint.
TODO: this isn't quite right...
```
Γ (X = A) ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ fix X => A <: fix X => A'
```
This implies that unrolling a step of the fixpoint makes the type more specific,
making use of the substitution subtyping rule.
For example
```
fix n => { Zero#{,} | Suc#{ Zero#{,} | Suc#n } } <:
fix n => { Zero#{,} | Suc#n }
```

**Application**

TODO

**Substitution**

Subtype using substitution.
TODO: is this ok, or does it break typechecking? 
TODO: if this works, then typechecking can just use let-normal form
```
---
Γ , (X = A) ⊢ A <: X
```

## Typing

**Tagged term**

Type of tag.
```
Γ ⊢ a : A
---
t#a : t#A
```

**Untagged term**

Type of untag.
```
Γ ⊢ b : t#A
---
b.t : A
```

**Abstraction**

Abstraction.
```
Γ , (x : A) ⊢ b : B
---
Γ ⊢ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b) : A → B
```

**Application**

```
Γ ⊢ f : A → B
Γ ⊢ a : A
---
Γ ⊢ f a : B
```

**Conjunction**

```
[ Γ ⊢ aᵢ : Aᵢ ]
---
Γ ⊢ { [ aᵢ , ] } : { [ Aᵢ , ] }
```

**Let-term**

```
Γ ⊢ a : A
Γ , (a : A) ⊢ b : B
--- 
Γ ⊢ let x : A = a in b : B
```

**Let-type**

```
Γ ⊢ X : K
Γ , (X : K = A) ⊢ b : B
--- 
Γ ⊢ let X : K = A in b : B
```

**Fixpoint**

```
Γ , (x : TODO) ⊢ b : B
Γ ⊢ μ x ⇒ b : B
```


## Normalization of Types

**Theorem.** If `Γ ⊢ a : A` and `Γ ⊢ a' : A'` and `Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A'`, then 
`Γ ⊢ a : A'` and `Γ ⊢ a' : A`. That is, normalization doesn't make a type more
or less specific.

Transitivity.
```
Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A'
Γ ⊢ A' ⇓ A''
---
Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A''
```

Overall goal: convert nested conjunctions/disjunctions to CNF.

Flatten conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ { { A , B } , C } ⇓ { A , B , C }
Γ ⊢ { { A | B } | C } ⇓ { A | B | C }
```

Distribute disjunction over conjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ { A | { B , C } } ⇓ { { A | B } , { A , C } }
```

TODO: do i actually want to distribute these? It seems yes because you can go
one way but not the other, so if you want to normalize you have to go this way.

Distribute tag over conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ t#{ A , B } ⇓ { t#A , t#B }
Γ ⊢ t#{ A | B } ⇓ { t#A | t#B }
```

Distribute arrow over conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A → { B , C } ⇓ { { A → B } , { A → C } }
Γ ⊢ A → { B | C } ⇓ { { A → B } | { A → C } }
```

NOTE: cannot distribute fixedpoint over conjunction/disjunction.

Normalize under tag. TODO: write
Normalize under conjunction/disjunction. TODO: write
Normalize under arrow. TODO: write

Normalize under type application.
```
Γ , (F = ∀ [ xᵢ ] ⇒ B) ⊢ F [ Aᵢ ] ⇓ B[ xᵢ ↦ Aᵢ ] 
```

TODO: more normalizations

## Normalization of Terms

**Theorem.** _(Evaluation)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` and `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'` then `∅ ⊢ a' val`.

**Theorem.** _(Type preservation)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` and `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'` then 
`a' : A`.

**Theorem.** _(Progress)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` then either `∅ ⊢ a val` or `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'`
for some `a'`.

**Variable**

```
∅
---
Δ , (x = a) ⊢ x ⇓ a
```

**Tag**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
---
Δ ⊢ t#a ⇓ t#a'
```

**Untag**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ t#b
---
Δ ⊢ a.t ⇓ b
```

**Conjunction**

```
[ Δ ⊢ aᵢ ⇓ aᵢ' ]
---
Δ ⊢ { [ aᵢ , ] } ⇓ { [ aᵢ' , ] }
```

**Abstraction**

```
Δ ⊢ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b) val
```

**Application**

Application of abstraction.
```
Δ ⊢ f ⇓ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b)
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
Δ ⊢ b[x ↦ a'] ⇓ b'
---
Δ ⊢ f a ⇓ b'
```

**Let-Term**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
Δ , (x = a') ⊢ b ⇓ b' 
---
Δ ⊢ let x : A = a in b ⇓ b'
```

**Let-Type**

```
Δ ⊢ b ⇓ b'
---
Δ ⊢ let … : … = … in b ⇓ b'
```

## Unification

The unifier type of two types is the most specific type that both types are subtypes of e.g.

```
Γ ⊢ A ~{U}~ B
---
Γ ⊢ A <: U
Γ ⊢ B <: U
Γ ⊢ forall U' if A <: U' and B <: U', then U <: U'
```

**Theorem.** For all types `A` and `B`, exists `C` such that `A ~{C}~ B`.

TODO: unification rules

## Typechecker Algorithm

TODO



## Resources

[struct-ref-types-tyde2022]: https://ps.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/publications/binder22refinement.pdf

Commit message:

a few more notes about unification

design/notes_v3.md, after:

# Modut

A programming language with...
- functional
- statically typed
- substructurally typed (subtypes)
- conjunctions/disjunctions of types
- tagged types
- [structural refinement types][struct-ref-types-tyde2022]

## Restrictions

No higher-kinded polymorphism
- Higher-kinded polymorphism would require keeping track of polarity constraints
  on higher-kinded type variables

Tuple fields must be named (tagged).
- It's better etiquette anyway
- The flattening and unordering of conjunctions is important to many subtyping
  features, so its cumbersome to add ordered tuples as a basic language feature
  rather than just as a type alias i.e.
  `Tuple3 = forall a b c => { Field1#a , Field2#b , Field3#c }`.

No basic datatypes i.e. `data Nat = ...`
- Tags, conjunctions, disjunctions, and fixpoints allow for the full
  expressiveness (and more) of _regular types_, which has been recognized as a
  reasonable basis for a polymorphic datatype system.
- Named datatypes are just type aliases. Let-normal form keeps track of the
  named given in type aliases to ensure nice-looking error messages.

## Syntax

- The notation `*[...]` indicates that the contained phrase can be repeated any
  number of times (including 0 times).
- The notation `?[...]` indicates that the contained phrase is optional.
```
<kd> ::= *[ Type -> ] Type

// TODO: need to keep track of polarities? for the sake of subtyping? 
// TODO: or, will this work out since let-type just makes an alias which is expanded during typechecking
<ty1> ::= ∀ *[<ty-var>] ⇒ <ty>

<ty> ::=
  | <ty-var>
  | <tag> # <ty>
  | {*[<ty> ,]}
  | {*[<ty> |]}
  | <ty> → <ty>
  | μ <ty-var> ⇒ <ty>
  | <ty-var> <ty>

<tm> ::=
  | <tm-var>
  | <tag>#<tm>
  | <tm>.<tag>
  | {*[ <tm> , ]} 
  | λ (<tm-var> : <ty>) ⇒ b
  | μ <tm-var> ⇒ <tm>
  | <tm> <tm>
  | let <tm-var> : <ty1> = <tm> in <tm>
  | let <ty-var> : <kd> = <ty1> in <tm>

<tag> ::= <tag-name>
<ty-var> ::= <type-variable-name>
<tm-var> ::= <term-variable-name>
```

Syntax sugar
```text
<tm> +::= λ{ *[ <pat> ⇒ <tm> | ] }

<pat> ::=
  | <tm-var> : <ty>
  | <tag>#<pat>
  | {*[ <pat> , ]}

λ{ (x : A) ⇒ b }      ::= λ (x : A) ⇒ b
λ{ t#p ⇒ b }          ::= λ (x : t#_) ⇒ λ{ p ⇒ b } x.t
λ{ { [ pᵢ , ] } ⇒ b } ::= λ a ⇒ [ λ{ pᵢ ⇒ ] b [ } a ] 
λ{ [ pᵢ ⇒ bᵢ | ] }    ::= { [ λ{ pᵢ ⇒ bᵢ } , ] }
```

Special features:
- Polymorphism is *implicit*
- No *pattern matching* in basic syntax
  - can be achieved via conjunctions of annotated lambdas
- Tag types and terms are special. They are uniquely identified by their tag.
  - The `<tag>#<tm>` form "wraps", or "tags", a type or term.
  - The `<tm>.<tag>` form "unwraps", or "untags", a tagged term.
    - There is no type-level operation to untag a tagged type.

**Examples**
```text
Option = ∀ a ⇒ { None#{,} | Some#a }
Nat = μ n ⇒ { Zero#{,} | Suc#n }


// without syntax sugar
pred_of_Nat =
  { λ (_ : Zero#{,}) ⇒ None#{,} }
  , λ (n : Suc#Nat) ⇒ Some#(n.Suc) }
// with syntax sugar
pred_of_Nat = λ
  { Zero#{,} ⇒ None#{,}
  , Suc#(n : Nat) ⇒ Some#n }

pred_of_Nat : 
  { Zero#{,} → None#{,} | Suc#Nat → Some#Nat } <:
  { Zero#{,} | Suc#Nat } → { None#{,} | Some#Nat } =
  Nat → Option Nat

// without syntax sugar
pred_of_Suc = λ (n : Suc Nat) ⇒ n.Suc#
// with syntax sugar
pred_of_Suc = λ{ Suc#(n : Nat) ⇒ n }

pred_of_Suc :
  Suc#Nat → Nat <:
  Nat → Nat
```

## Kinding

Kinding type variable.
```
∅
---
Γ , (X : Type) ⊢ X : Type
```

Kinding abstraction.
```
Γ , [ (Xᵢ : Type) ] ⊢ A : Type
---
Γ ⊢ ∀ [ Xᵢ ] ⇒ A : [ Type → ] Type
```

Kinding application.
```
Γ ⊢ F = ∀ [ Xᵢ ] ⇒ A
Γ ⊢ F : [ Type → ] Type
[ Γ ⊢ Aᵢ : Type ]
---
Γ ⊢ F [ Aᵢ ] : Type
```

Kinding conjunction.
```
TODO
```

Kinding type disjunction.
```
TODO
```

Kinding arrow.
```
Γ ⊢ A : Type
Γ ⊢ B : Type
---
Γ ⊢ A -> B : Type
```

Kinding fixpoint.
```
Γ , (X : Type) ⊢ A : Type 
---
Γ ⊢ fix X => A : Type
```

## Subtyping

Read `A <: A'` as "`A` is less general than `A'`. For example, `A` is less
general than `{ A | B }`, and `{ A , B }` is less general than `A`.

Notation
```text
{ A } ::= { A | } or { A , }
{ Aᵢ * } ::= { A_1 * ... * A_n } for some n
```

Subtyping coercion.
_Intuition:_ if `A` is more specific that `A'`, then `a : A` implies that 
`a : A'`.
```
Γ ⊢ a : A
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ a : A'
```

**Tagged type**

Subtype under tag.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ t#A <: t#A'
```

**Arrow**

Subtype under arrow.
_Intuition:_ if `f : A → B` is a subtype of `f' : A' → B'`, then `f` handles
only some of the inputs that `f'` does and `f` yields more outputs that `f'`
does.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
Γ ⊢ B' <: B
---
Γ ⊢ (A → B) <: (A' → B')
```

**Conjunction**

Subtype into singleton conjunction (Same as singleton disjunction).
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ A <: { A }
```

Subtype under conjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ { A , B } <: { A' , B }
```

Subtype weaken conjunction.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { A , B } <: { B }
```

Subtype empty conjunction.
_Intuition_: the empty conjunction `{,}` is like unit, is has one form and so
every other type is more specific than it.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ A <: {,}
```

Subtype over arrows under conjunction.
_Intuition:_ this must handle all input types, but client only needs to handle one
output type.
output.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { [ Aᵢ -> Bᵢ , ] } <: { [ Aᵢ , ] } -> { [ Bᵢ | ] }
```

**Disjunction**

Subtype into singleton disjunction. (Same as singleton conjunction.)
```
∅
---
Zero = Zero#{,}
Γ ⊢ A <: { A }
```

Subtype under disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ { A | B } <: { A' | B }
```

Subtype weaken disjunction.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { A } <: { A | B }
```

Subtype empty conjunction.
_Intuition:_ the empty conjunction `{|}` is like void; it has no forms and so it
is more specific than any other type. 
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ {|} <: A
```

Subtype over arrows under disjunction.  
_Intuition:_ this only needs to handle one input type, but client must handle all
types of output.
```
∅
---
Γ ⊢ { [ Aᵢ -> Bᵢ | ] } <: { [ Aᵢ | ] } -> { [ Bᵢ , ] }
```

**Fixpoint**

Subtype under fixpoint.
TODO: this isn't quite right...
```
Γ (X = A) ⊢ A <: A'
---
Γ ⊢ fix X => A <: fix X => A'
```
This implies that unrolling a step of the fixpoint makes the type more specific,
making use of the substitution subtyping rule.
For example
```
fix n => { Zero#{,} | Suc#{ Zero#{,} | Suc#n } } <:
fix n => { Zero#{,} | Suc#n }
```

**Application**

TODO

**Substitution**

Subtype using substitution.
TODO: is this ok, or does it break typechecking? 
TODO: if this works, then typechecking can just use let-normal form
```
---
Γ , (X = A) ⊢ A <: X
```

## Typing

**Tagged term**

Type of tag.
```
Γ ⊢ a : A
---
t#a : t#A
```

**Untagged term**

Type of untag.
```
Γ ⊢ b : t#A
---
b.t : A
```

**Abstraction**

Abstraction.
```
Γ , (x : A) ⊢ b : B
---
Γ ⊢ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b) : A → B
```

**Application**

```
Γ ⊢ f : A → B
Γ ⊢ a : A
---
Γ ⊢ f a : B
```

**Conjunction**

```
[ Γ ⊢ aᵢ : Aᵢ ]
---
Γ ⊢ { [ aᵢ , ] } : { [ Aᵢ , ] }
```

**Let-term**

```
Γ ⊢ a : A
Γ , (a : A) ⊢ b : B
--- 
Γ ⊢ let x : A = a in b : B
```

**Let-type**

```
Γ ⊢ X : K
Γ , (X : K = A) ⊢ b : B
--- 
Γ ⊢ let X : K = A in b : B
```

**Fixpoint**

```
Γ , (x : TODO) ⊢ b : B
Γ ⊢ μ x ⇒ b : B
```


## Normalization of Types

**Theorem.** If `Γ ⊢ a : A` and `Γ ⊢ a' : A'` and `Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A'`, then 
`Γ ⊢ a : A'` and `Γ ⊢ a' : A`. That is, normalization doesn't make a type more
or less specific.

Transitivity.
```
Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A'
Γ ⊢ A' ⇓ A''
---
Γ ⊢ A ⇓ A''
```

Overall goal: convert nested conjunctions/disjunctions to CNF.

Flatten conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ { { A , B } , C } ⇓ { A , B , C }
Γ ⊢ { { A | B } | C } ⇓ { A | B | C }
```

Distribute disjunction over conjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ { A | { B , C } } ⇓ { { A | B } , { A , C } }
```

TODO: do i actually want to distribute these? It seems yes because you can go
one way but not the other, so if you want to normalize you have to go this way.

Distribute tag over conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ t#{ A , B } ⇓ { t#A , t#B }
Γ ⊢ t#{ A | B } ⇓ { t#A | t#B }
```

Distribute arrow over conjunction/disjunction.
```
Γ ⊢ A → { B , C } ⇓ { { A → B } , { A → C } }
Γ ⊢ A → { B | C } ⇓ { { A → B } | { A → C } }
```

NOTE: cannot distribute fixedpoint over conjunction/disjunction.

Normalize under tag. TODO: write
Normalize under conjunction/disjunction. TODO: write
Normalize under arrow. TODO: write

Normalize under type application.
```
Γ , (F = ∀ [ xᵢ ] ⇒ B) ⊢ F [ Aᵢ ] ⇓ B[ xᵢ ↦ Aᵢ ] 
```

TODO: more normalizations

## Normalization of Terms

**Theorem.** _(Evaluation)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` and `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'` then `∅ ⊢ a' val`.

**Theorem.** _(Type preservation)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` and `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'` then 
`a' : A`.

**Theorem.** _(Progress)_ If `∅ ⊢ a : A` then either `∅ ⊢ a val` or `∅ ⊢ a ⇓ a'`
for some `a'`.

**Variable**

```
∅
---
Δ , (x = a) ⊢ x ⇓ a
```

**Tag**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
---
Δ ⊢ t#a ⇓ t#a'
```

**Untag**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ t#b
---
Δ ⊢ a.t ⇓ b
```

**Conjunction**

```
[ Δ ⊢ aᵢ ⇓ aᵢ' ]
---
Δ ⊢ { [ aᵢ , ] } ⇓ { [ aᵢ' , ] }
```

**Abstraction**

```
Δ ⊢ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b) val
```

**Application**

Application of abstraction.
```
Δ ⊢ f ⇓ (λ (x : A) ⇒ b)
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
Δ ⊢ b[x ↦ a'] ⇓ b'
---
Δ ⊢ f a ⇓ b'
```

**Let-Term**

```
Δ ⊢ a ⇓ a'
Δ , (x = a') ⊢ b ⇓ b' 
---
Δ ⊢ let x : A = a in b ⇓ b'
```

**Let-Type**

```
Δ ⊢ b ⇓ b'
---
Δ ⊢ let … : … = … in b ⇓ b'
```

## Unification

The unifier type of two types is the most specific type that both types are subtypes of i.e.

```
Γ ⊢ A ~{C}~ B
---
Γ ⊢ A <: C
Γ ⊢ B <: C
Γ ⊢ forall C', A <: C' and B <: C' implies C <: C'
```

**The bottom type**. The empty disjunction type, `[|]`, is the _bottom_ type
and has no inhabitants. `forall A, [|] <: A`.

**The top type**. The empty conjunction type, `[,]`, is the _top_ type i.e. and
has one (trivial) inhabitant. `forall A, A <: [,]`.

**Lemma.** For all types `A` and `B`, exists `C` such that `A ~{C}~ B`.
**Proof**. In the worse case, `A ~{ [|] }~ B`. In the best case `A ~{ A } B` or
`A ~{ B }~ B`. TODO: full proof.

## Typechecker Algorithm

TODO

## Resources

- [Structural Refinement Types][struct-ref-types-tyde2022]

[struct-ref-types-tyde2022]: https://ps.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/publications/binder22refinement.pdf
